I taught myself to type on a manual portable typewriter, aged 12. By age 16, the typewriter died — the keys began snapping from metal fatigue. (I am not making this up.) After much whining and kvetching, my parents bought me ... a new manual typewriter. This was in 1980. Home computers were showing up in shop windows and magazine adverts, but at home we had a black and white TV and a record player.

This is the story of how I missed the first wave of the home computing revolution but caught the second, and where it took me.

I was, I think, liable to go a bit computer-mad from the moment I first saw a Commodore PET in a shop window in 1977. I wasn't the only one in my generation; it was a bit like being airminded, half a century earlier. And I did, in fact, glom onto computers early — but was handicapped by the lack of resources at my school. (A school which was ahead of the curve by English educational standards; a lab containing three Apple IIs and a System-525 S-100 bus machine running "CCP/M" (but hobbled by only having a single terminal, plus a DECWriter) turned up in 1980. Yes, that's four computers for a school with over 1000 pupils. It was a lot, in those days.) I took optional courses in BASIC and PASCAL programming, I read PCW, I ploughed through GEB ... and in mid-1981, I used a large chunk of my savings to buy a Sinclair "ZX-81".

The ZX-81 sucked. It fell, not to put too fine a point on it, a little bit short of what I knew I wanted. Programming it in BASIC was not only tedious -- it lacked any obvious way of loading and saving data on tape (other than as DATA statements inline in your code). I wasn't quite up to grappling, unasisted, with the book on assembly language programming that I'd bought; so after four months I gave up, sold it, and used the proceeds to buy a Casio "FX-702P" (which I still have, although I haven't put batteries in it and powered it up for a decade). As a programmable calculator, it helped get me through those all-important "A" levels and into university. And it was the last computer I bought until ...

Autumn 1985, as I began my third year of a pharmacy degree, which was when Amstrad launched the PCW 8256 word processor.

Now, this wasn't to say that I'd been ignoring the whole home computing revolution. On the contrary — I'd been drooling after one continously. But I was an impecunious student, and I was smart enough to know that in addition to a computer I'd need a TV or monitor, and a printer, and other odds and ends like software. The sums didn't add up. Back in 1985, an original Macintosh 128K would have cost roughly my entire year's student grant (a subsistence allowance subsequently replaced by student loans; at that time, it was comparable to long-term unemployment benefits — which might have been livable if I hadn't been studying in London); ditto an IBM PC without a hard disk.

My interest in computing was on hold because I was studying a tough course and didn't have the money or time to pursue other diversions. Accounts on the university mainframe were just about available if you knew who to ask — but it's probably a good thing that I didn't; in that final year of my first degree I had a 40 hour a week lecture/tutorial/laboratory workload plus assignments and reading.

But the PCW fitted a need. It was sold as a dedicated word processor, but Amstrad had shipped a copy of CP/M 3.0 on the flipside of the boot disk. A bunch of older CP/M applications magically acquired an afterlife on 3" floppy (yes, the PCW used three-inch floppy disks, unique except for Amstrad's other computers and the Tatung Einstein; these are not the 3.5" floppies you're probably thinking of). I'm left-handed and am rather bad at drawing; DR GRAPH saved my ass on some of those lab write-ups, and I wrote up my dissertation in Locoscript.

I also carried on writing fiction. I was doing this in the background, the whole time: it might help to know that I was averaging 1-2 novels a year, for very approximate values of "novel". (They weren't publishable. I was writing my million words of crap. You don't want to read them, honest.) The PCW allowed a step change in my writing around this time; it made it easy to edit. And with editing, my output improved in quality, if not in quantity. A month after I bought the PCW, I wrote the story that became my first commercially published piece. I sold it to Interzone later that year; it was the first of several. I was overjoyed! Word processing, it seems, is what it took to allow me to tune my drivel for readability. Probably because I'm too lazy to edit the traditional way, using white-out and scissors and much copy-typing ...

But I digress: this piece isn't about the writing, it's about the other stuff.

Having acquired a word processor, and been satisfied, I might have stopped right there, if not for a subtle oversight on the part of a programmer at a now-defunct software house. However, Locoscript, the word processor that shipped with the PCW, in that bundled version, lacked a single feature that drove me right up the wall: there was no word count function.

Most of the time, most folks don't need to know how many words they've typed. But if you're writing up essays to length, you can use a word counter. And if you occasionally write short stories and mail them to magazines, the editors like to know how long they are.

Within 48 hours of getting my PCW out of its box and fitting the plug, I'd flipped the boot disk over and was poring over the Mallard BASIC manual, trying to get my head around how to read a file. Within 4 weeks I'd figured out that BASIC wasn't a terribly useful programming language. (As it happens, you can do what I wanted to do in BASIC; but I couldn't see how back then. Not enough theory.) So I got my hands on a C compiler and stared at the manual and (abbreviated) language guide in incomprehension. "What's a pointer?" And then a PASCAL compiler, and then a library of public domain software, and then, and then ...

By the time I sold the PCW and upgraded to my first real PC (18 months later, on the back of the income from my first post-graduate, post-registration job as a pharmacist) it had twice as much RAM as I'd started with, an extra floppy disk, and a whopping great 10Mb hard drive from which it booted CP/M. I'd written my own word counter, and a bunch of other stuff. And I was half way through a part-time night school "A" level in computer science, and finding it boring and slow-paced.

By 1988 the PC habit had bitten me hard. I was terminally bored (and stressed) by the job; I'd acquired a portable computer (a Victor Vicki — luggable version of the Sirius 9000 MS-DOS family, which were not IBM-compatible) and was using it in quite patches during the day at work. I knew I wanted to quit pharmacy, and an escape route was in sight. The British government woke up some time in 1987 and panicked when they noticed that the British computer industry was basically turning into an offshore annexe of silicon valley, and that there weren't enough CS graduates coming off the production line to meet demand for skills. To deal with the sucking skills gap, they provided funding for a bunch of conversion course postgraduate degrees.

The idea was that if you already had a decent science degree, you could go back to university on a stipend, and the staff of the local computer science department would drop the equivalent of an undergraduate CS degree on your head in 12 months. This was harsh — very harsh. If you passed, they handed you a master's certificate: it was a taught master's degree, rather than a research one, but you'd probably have earned it because rather than being spoon-fed, they were about to shove a funnel into your throat and start pouring buckets down it. The UK is oriented around the three year degree course (these days there are more four year degrees) so there's less time for spoon-feeding and hand-holding to start with. The MSc conversion degrees left the spoon-feeding out entirely — no second chances, no exam resits — and was pretty wasteful: the year I did it, about 35-40% of the class failed. (And these folks had previously made it through a regular science degree.)

By 1989 I was desperate to get out of pharmacy — in the end, I quit one summer locum job three weeks early, due to being physically unable to contemplate going in to work. (In ten weeks of that job I'd been driving roughly 150 miles a day and working nine hours on my feet; I lost 15 kilos and was on the edge of a nervous breakdown when I quit.) But I'd been accepted for the MSc conversion course at Bradford Uni. I sold my flat (back then, a single young professional could get a mortgage on a one bedroom apartment for sum equal to about two year's wages), moved into a shared house in Bradford, used a chunk of the proceeds from the house to buy the most kick-ass computer I could find, and ...

... I went blind in one eye.

Oh yes. Sometimes life kicks you in the pants, hard: in my case, I sprang a detached retina about four weeks before I was due to embark on a career-changing gamble. Worse: the detachment was held in place by a ridge of scar tissue — it wasn't visible to an opthalmoscope inspection. The upshot is that I ended up being rushed into hospital for eye surgery (it was way beyond laser treatment by this time) two weeks before starting the degree. And I turned up to register for the course wearing a bandage on one side of my head, and walking into things because I only have half my visual field working in the other eye.

I swear, I didn't have time to read any fiction for six months after I started that course.

You go to university. You register. You get your username and password on the UNIX servers, go through basic orientation, collect your grant cheque, and then on day three the teaching begins. Your syllabus is: you will learn one of PASCAL or COBOL, with an optional introduction to C, and if you're taking PASCAL you'll be doing funky stuff with data structures such as linked lists and trees and record structures before it's over. (If you can't conceptualize pointers, you are in for a world of hurt.) You will learn about general theory and structure of operating systems including concurrency, scheduling, kernel functions and structures, filesystems ... oh, and there'll be an introduction to UNIX. At the same time you're doing this you will be learning Z-80 assembly language and programming a single board teaching system using a hex keypad. You will also be brushing up on binary, octal, and hecadecimal arithmetic, boolean algebra, basics of symbolic logic, and some of the other hum-drum theory you'll need. And then there's the hardware side: transistors; logic gates: learning to build things like half-adders and flip-flops: and then learning some of the basics of logic circuit design (culminating in something like building a traffic light controller for a multi-way junction). All in the first six weeks.

I said I didn't have time to read any fiction for six months; I'm not sure I had time to sleep. I worked 70-80 hours a week for nearly 50 weeks. Buying that kick-ass PC was a life-saver; my digs were a half-hour walk from the comp. sci. department, where there were cheap plastic bucket seats in front of VT52 terminals hanging off a shared Sun-4 running SunOS. In contrast, I had a reclining office chair in front of a giant 13" colour VGA monitor, hooking into my very own 20MHz 386 with its own 40Mb hard disk and a huge 2Mb of RAM! (Which I later upgraded to 4Mb.) I had an IDE and Turbo Pascal running under DesqView/386. And more to the point, I was finally studying something I was interested in. Luxury!

But all good times come to an end. And in the summer of 1990 — right in the middle of the biggest recession since 1980 — I emerged blinking into the sunlight, clutching a slightly moist piece of parchment saying I was the proud owner of a cargo cult computer science degree, and began looking for work.

And that's when my employment history turned really strange ...